Now that we have the very basics out of the way,
let's work on the positioning again.
Right now, we only position one element, element three with the help of grid column start and grid
row start and end. We're using the line numbers right, now
it turns out we can also specify some other values there or change the way we use the line numbers.
For example here, grid column start and end,
right now we're saying start at the line with the number three and end right before the line number
five,
nothing wrong with that
but another way of expressing this for this element would be start at line number three and then span
two cells,
so occupy two cells and that can be done by changing the five in grid column end to span two. Span is
a keyword here,
not something I did come up with,
it's defined in the CSS specification and it tells it to simply end after it occupies two cells.
So if I reload, we have the same result as before
but as you can see if we inspect element three, we do have this rule in effect and it just leads to the same result
as before because we occupy the same amount of cells.
If we say span three here and we reload, we see nothing changes though because we can't go further to
the right,
we only get two columns here,
we would need to define more to span more than that or simply start earlier.
If we start at line number two here, instead of three and I now reload,
now everything changed,
now we take three columns width because of span three and the other elements also needed to be repositioned
because we now occupy
for example the place where element two could be seen earlier.
So span is very interesting.
Now sometimes you also have another behavior where you want to ensure that a certain value takes a
full row.
Now clearly, you can say start at line number one and then define the last number as the end number or span
four in our grid
but there also is another nice trick, taking advantage of another way of using these elements.
Let's use the element two for this now
and for that, I'll add a grid column start here of one because I want to start in first column and grid
column end will now not be span four which would take the entire row and it will not be five which would
take the entire row but -1. You can define negative line numbers too
and what this will lead to is simply that it starts counting from the end of the grid,
so from the right here and one number or one line from the right is just line number five.
The advantage is of course if we add one extra column to this grid, we don't need to change this line because
one column from the right will still be one column from the right.
If we defined a column end of five here and we add another column to the grid, then we would have to bump this
up to six,
so this means we have to revisit this place,
it's easier if we use that trick.
And of course you're not limited to -1, you could say -2 too to move two columns in from the
right but -1 is now just to the end.
Now if we save that, before I reload, there is something interesting which should happen now.
Please note that I'm saying that element two should take the entire row but element three is there already,
at least partly,
so what would you expect to happen? Well let's try it out. What we see is that element two jumps into a new
line and this cell where it previously was stays empty because there is no element we could put in there.
Element four could be put in there but it comes after element two in a DOM order and it doesn't jump ahead.
So element two gets into a new line because it couldn't take that line as it was already partly taken
by element three.
Interesting, but what if we now also set the row in element two,
so on that red element? If I set grid row start to let's say line number two and then I set grid row
end to span one, which I don't have to do by the way, this is the default,
so you can also omit this but if I set it to be really clear about what's happening, then I'm saying
the red row here, element two should start in this row,
so it should really be in that row where the green element also is.
Let's reload and see what happens.
Now indeed, they overlap as you can see.
We get this area here where we have both element two and element three and that is something very important
to remember,
elements can overlap,
they can occupy the same cell, if and that's important, if you explicitly set this. The grid will always
try to avoid this but of course there are situations where you want to have overlapping cells and then
you can force it by clearly setting the column and row position.
Now the question is, which one is on top?
And the answer is the DOM order is important, element three comes after element two and therefore, element
three is on top.
We can change this with the set index though, even though we don't have position absolute but the grid
supports it, we can set the set index on element two, which would not be on top normally, to 10 let's say.
The default value of auto is equal to zero,
so 10 is definitely higher. If we now reload, we see the red one is on top now.
So this is something extremely useful to take away, that you got different ways of targeting starts and
ends of your columns and rows and that elements can overlap.
And with that, let's dive into one other thing we can do with these line numbers.